---
title: Do we truly need a true sex: from Herculine Barbin to a broader sense of “we”
categories:
- Gender and Sexuality
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---

In the introduction of Herculine Barbin, Foucault asks the question “Do we truly need a true sex?”  Both the introduction and the dossier focus on the diagnose of sex of the hermaphrodites, which is misleading in the sense that Foucault is only concerned about the necessity of finding out the truth for the sexually controversial individuals. However, the “we” in the question should be considered in a broader sense – not only hermaphrodites, “ ‘passive’ man” and “ ‘virile’ woman”  , but also the ones who do not come across identity crisis. Foucault does suggest, though indirectly, the broader understanding of this question. By pointing out the cultural influence of psychoanalysis and its core idea “at the bottom of sex, there is truth” , he points out what the true sex implies is the truth behind it that everyone, having a true sex no matter reluctantly or voluntarily, can escape from. In other words, once we have that “true” sex, we have to admit all the requirements and interpretations attached to it. Therefore, it’s necessary to bridge the gap between the case studies of hermaphrodite and the question of the broader “we”. How does the so-called unusualness contribute to the criticism of sexual identity in general? What needs to be clarified is that I am not meant to bold the border of “normal” and “abnormal”. Conversely, I am intended to stress that all of us are in the same situation, as Foucault puts it, where “Everybody was to have his or her primary, profound, determined and determining sexual identity” . While hermaphrodites struggle to resist the “true sex”, the broader “we” live with the belief that we need true sex without doubt, which is a, if not false, at least problematic belief. Before linking with the broader “we”, I would step into Herculine Barbin’ s case to illustrate how the memoir, reports, and news jointly support my claim that the true sex lies “nowhere”, so it’s impossible for anyone to “have” the true sex.

Regardless of whether Barbin should have a true sex (which is yet too complex to handle right now), he refused the true sex. The memoir itself depicts the discontent: “It displeased me to see him initiate himself into my dearest secrets, and I answered in not very restrained terms certain of his remarks that seemed to me to be a violation.”  The similar emotion can also be found in his imagination of scientists analyzing his corpse without his passionate soul, but in a more furious tone.  Facing the doctors who worked hard to dig out her “truth”, she felt offended, because her truest self would be exposed and translated in a rigid way that could not represent her at all. Besides, the refusal is also presented through the struggle of different texts, namely the contrast between the ambiguous writing of the memoir and the clear exposure of the medical reports. A salient example is the medical report by Chesnet that expatiates the shape of Barbin’s sexual organs with the process of examination. These private and uncomfortable details never exist in Barbin’s memoir. Comparing the sensitive memoir and the professional medical report, one can aware of how the report flattens such a vivid person and how improper stipulating his or her sex due to the physical traits.

However, the relationship between the memoir and the medical report is more than simply contrary. They are closely intertwined, providing a possibility of reinterpretation. For instance, both of them contain the desire for love. The erotic desire in the report is regarded as evidence for attesting to her true sex, while that in the memoir is a denial of the sexual distinction in love. Though the memoir is filled with fervent love, as Mak argues, “Nowhere is there an explicit comment suggesting eroticism was at play here or one revealing inborn masculine desire.”   I basically agree with Mak that Barbin’s intimate relationship with the girls is generally a pure friendship that is distinct from the typical masculine pursuit of females. However, there are indications that some erotic desire is hidden and blurred intentionally or unintentionally in her writing. For example, on a stormy night, Barbin “had fallen prostrate into the arms of Sister Marie-des-Anges” out of fear. “An incredible sensation dominated me completely and overwhelmed me with shame.”  No one can tell where the sensation and shame came from. It can be explained as the exposure of fear being perceived, but why isn’t it sexual instinct aroused by the young lady? Had the doctors noticed this plot, they would have taken it as evidence to prove his instinctive masculine desire, which is not what Barbin would like to admit. This does not indicate that the desire is masculine as the doctors state, but it’s also not as pure as Mak claims. It’s itself instinctive and undefinable. Moreover, Barbin’s own depiction put a veil on it. Thus, Barbin’s memoir, meant to resist the medical authority, at the same time renders supportive material to his opponent. The almost asexual love that blurs masculinity and femininity, as well as heterosexuality and homosexuality can be easily turned into a justification of true sex from a scientific perspective.

In short, the memoir and the medical report stand for two positions: concealment and exposure. Ideally, the concealment preserves the sex, so the sex maintains itself but unseen. The exposure dig the sex out, but it’s no longer the true sex – it is reduced to observable physical traits. However, neither is the memoir absolute concealment nor is the medical report absolute exposure. The concealment and exposure are constantly confronting each other. Therefore, the “true” sex is always on the way of being concealed or exposed or both. It lies “nowhere”. This suggests that there is no true sex for Barbin.

Apart from the memoir and medical report that I emphasized, the news also reacts to the whole issue. In the L’Echo rochelais on 18 July 1860, it is commented that “the girl’s Christian upbringing was an innocent blindfold that veiled the truth from her.”  The news assumes the truth is what justified by science. However, if the claim is put into the memoir, the blindfold didn’t veil anything. On the contrary, it prevented the natural expression of sex from being restricted. The moment the blindfold was uncovered, namely the science justified his “true” sex, he was drawn into alienation. When the blindfold is put into the context of the memoir and the medical report, different meaning arises, which question our understanding of truth.

Foucault’s introduction correlates the medical diagnosis of the true sex with scientists’ fascination of truth under the illusion. It’s the belief of modern scientists that what they are responsible to do is to explode the lie of the illusionary body and find the “true sex” behind it.  On one hand, this methodology is based on the philosophical tradition that the essence lies behind the world of appearance, or as Foucault puts it, “a manner of acting that is not adequate to reality” . This tradition itself is challenged in several ways, such as phenomenology and Foucault’s discursive theory. On the other hand, the truth of sex is not only corresponding with the fact, but also fitting the regularity, including the moral concern. Therefore, the “true sex” of the scientists is not truly the true sex. It’s merely the truth that a group of people believes and spread through power and authority.

Through the analysis of Barbin’s case studies, it has been clarified that there is no true sex because the true sex lies “nowhere”. If someone insists that there is true sex, it is highly suspicious that he or she is holding a misconception of it. Since true sex doesn’t exist, there is neither necessity nor possibility to need one. Nevertheless, the question “Do we truly need a true sex?” is not solved for the reason I present at the beginning: the conclusion derived from the hermaphrodite’s case is not sufficient for the broader “we”.

To broaden the applicability, I will access this question from the relationship between sex and self, because it involves each individual, and it is well elaborated in Herculine Barbin. As an autobiography, the memoir of Barbin can be rethought as the writing of self. As Porter argues, when Barbin was in the boarding school, which was a utopia for her, she was lack of motivation to write her story. It is after the declaration of his sex change that he “attempts to reclaim identity through writing”. It can then be concluded that the awareness of sex promotes self-consciousness.  There is no need to deny this connection, but this does not indicate that sex is an intrinsic constitutive part of the self. The all-girls boarding school provides an environment where the idea of sex is weakened, even overlooked. As Foucault describes it, “everything took place in a world of feelings -- enthusiasm, pleasure, sorrow, warmth, sweetness, bitterness -- where the identity of the partners and above all the enigmatic character around whom everything centered, had no importance.” To analyze the situation in the reality, we should point out the difference between our society and the utopia of boarding school. The single-gendered environment leaves more space for Barbin to have a relatively loose notice of sex. Therefore, although Barbin is special, the late intervention of the doctor enables her to develop her body and cope with her desire in her own way. It can even be assumed that it is her ambiguous and innocent youthhood that makes her diagnose of sex change comparatively so striking. Porter also noticed the autobiography writing action of Barbin leads to a contradiction. The autobiography writing generally requires highlighting personal characters, namely avoiding anonymity, but the “enforced acquisition of maleness is really an emptying out of self” .  By contrast, the broader “we” may grow with the unambiguous awareness of sex at a very young age. This awareness is permeated from our society, which is taken for granted. In this sense, “we” naturally believe we need true sex since we believe we “have” it all along. Thus, we have little chance to doubt it. Realizing this mindset is the precondition of thinking about the question of true sex.

Then, the true sex question turns into the question of true sex and self: without true sex, can the self stand by itself? We can also use Barbin’s case that avoid the exceptionality of hermaphrodism to the maximum extent. Mak assumes that there is no sex of self in Barbin’s memoir. “In Barbin’s autobiographic writing, I would conclude, sex is a social, economic and moral position.” “What can be learned from Barbin’s text is that such strong, personal emotions do not necessarily point to a damaged or confused sense of one’s sex of self.”  He argues that it is the relation, not the self that matters in the sex changes. The exposure of his hermaphrodism mostly influences his social relation.  I approve of the claim, though finding the argument questionable. Although I would argue the sex changes have a significant influence on one’s self, I approve that Mak’s claim suggests that self can be imagined as an existence independent from sex. This proves that we do not truly need a true sex.

The argument above mildly suggests that we do not truly need a true sex. It only proves the possibility of getting rid of the idea of true sex, but does not give reasons appealing enough to do so. To go a little further beyond the questions, we may be inspired by Barbin’s monologue that provides us a viewpoint that transcends the binary classification of male and female.

You are to be pitied more than I, perhaps. I soar above all your innumerable miseries, partaking of the nature of the angels; for, as you have said, my place is not in your narrow sphere. You have the earth, I have boundless space. Enchained here below by the thousand bonds of your gross, material senses, your spirits cannot plunge into that limpid Ocean of the infinite, where, lost for a day upon your arid shores, my soul drinks deep.  

As Hansen’s comment on Barbin’s suicide, “it is an act of resistance to modern life, a refusal to be a living being by refusing to be at all”, although “it does not successfully unmoor modern understandings of sexuate life nor is it an effective assault on dualist sexual regimes of power” . Barbin’s monologue is grandiloquent. He will never realize the transcendence in the reality. However, if we take a step back and read it in a more conservative manner, it suggests that we will meet a broader world when putting down the ideal of true sex.

To answer the question “Do we truly need a true sex?”, it’s necessary to step out of the scientists’ narrowed understanding of “true sex” which does not represent the truth itself. Nor do the personal sensations and feelings. The true sex lies “nowhere”. Instead of “answering” this question, we would rather say, Herculine Barbin put this question into an endless “process” by presenting the struggle of different discourses. Among them, the memoir and the medical report contain the most conflicts and produce the most meanings through the never-ended process of concealing and exposing. It is worth noticing that Herculine Barbin does not limit the process of answering to the individuals that have doubts about their sex, but includes “we” in a broader sense. This provides a wider range of possibilities of extended discussion: from sexual identity to ethnic identity, and even self-identity in the general sense.


Bibliography
Foucault, Michel, Herculine Barbin: being recently discovered memoirs of a nineteen-century French hermaphrodite, trans. by Richard McDougall (New York: Vintage Books, 1980)
Hansen, Sarah K., ‘Monsters of Sex: Michel Foucault and the Problem of Life’, in Foucault Studies, No.24 (2018), 102-24
Mak, Geertje, Doubting Sex: Inscriptions, Bodies and Selves in Nineteenth-Century Hermaphrodite Case Histories (Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press, 2012)
Porter, Roger J., ‘Figuration and disfigurement: Herculine Barbin and the autobiography of the body’, in Prose Studies: History, Theory, Criticism, 14:2, 122-36 (1991),122-136
