---
title: The Contradictory Relationships in a Performance of Violence
categories:
- Philosophy/Aesthetics
feature_image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=872"
---

The Contradictory Relationships in a Performance of Violence

*It’s important to perform it
because it’s beyond us.
– Julio Maquilón Flores*


The man and the woman stood face to face. Between them, there was a transparent plastic board held by two people. The man stuck his hands through the board into the long-sleeved gloves that were attached to the board. The hands in the gloves were slowly and softly put on the woman’s shoulders. As if examining something, the hands moved to her head and neck. He moved her a little closer to him. Then, the hands went under her armpits and were placed on her waist. Groping, the hands moved to her buttocks. After a while, the man grabbed the woman’s arm and pulled off the dress from her body. The man stopped for a second with palms facing up and fingers bent, and his hands grabbed her upper arms, moving her closer again. He turned her around. The woman was in a blank face. He took off her bra from the straps. She stood still, naked. The man covered her mouth and nose to choke her. Her face was squeezed and deformed. When he let go of his hands, she slightly bent over to breathe. He turned her back so that she faced him again. He pushed her hair back behind her ears twice and put his hand on her shoulders—a short pause.

He slapped her in the left face. The sound of rubber against the skin was quite loud compared to the long silence. The onlooker turned their face away. The man pulled her hair behind her ear again and slapped her right face. Clean her hair off her face, followed by more intensive face slapping, from slow to fast. After another round of slapping, he pressed her down to her knees.

The woman raised her head and groped at his left arm. She put his hand into her mouth and sucked his fingers. The man was looking down. At a moment, she stopped, stood up, and pushed the man’s arm to the other side of the board and at the same time, she stuck her arms into the gloves. With both hands in gloves, the woman touched the man’s face carefully, and it turned into rubbing his face. Afterwards, she took off the gloves and walked away.

This is a description of the recording of a performance excerpt created and performed by Julio and me, which premiered in May 2023 in Trondheim, Norway. I was the woman, the female performer. The performance was meant to discuss the power of the totalitarian regime and dictatorship of China in the context of zero-Covid policy. The rubber gloves and plastic board are used as the element of the endless PCR tests during that period. However, most audiences did not know this context, and they would unlikely see it as a political expression. The co-worker Julio said it was akin to a religious ritual. He considered it as a torture that everyone, including the audience and himself, was expecting for the end of it, but had the sense that it had to be completed.  This inspired me to revisit it as a ritual. In this essay, I would argue that even though it is created as a performance, it is closer to a ritual rather than a show.


In what sense it is a ritual? Based on the four modalities of interaction
According to the four modalities of interactions proposed by Michael Housman, the relationships between the action and disposition of ordinary interaction, ritual, play/game and show are summarized respectively. Different from the ordinary interaction in which the actions are generated from the internal state of the agent, the ritual is a set of actions that provoke dispositions (Houseman, 2003). In other words, instead of doing something as an expression or result of what one feels, it is what they do that generates the feeling (Houseman, 2007). In the play/game, actions are generated from not only the rules of the game but also the personal emotions of the player. The rule, which exists independently of the disposition, may have tension with personal emotions (Houseman, 2003). Opposite to the play/game, the show requires the actor to present the emotions to the audience. The actors should keep a distance from their disposition in order to project their emotions to the audience rather than merely affecting themselves (Houseman, 2003).

It is natural to consider the event in the description as a show, as involves an audience-performer relationship. The performer and actor were doing actions that were incoherent with and even against their disposition. As performers, Julio did not have the disposition such as lasciviousness or violence and neither did I have the desire to suck a man’s fingers. However, we were not playing any characters. Houseman’s explanation of the show is based on a more dramatic tradition that requires the actors to shape the character. In our case, we drew the movements and feelings from our personal experience, but they were not for portraying the character. Thus, the modality of the show has its limitations in answering the question: to what extent are our actions related to our dispositions?

To investigate this question, it is necessary to explain the creative process of this performance, which is closer to a play/game. In the rehearsal in a dance studio, we stood face-to-face with each other. “Slap me,” I said. His hesitating hand slowly traced an arc in the air which would definitely not result in a slap. I was a bit angry, “I am serious”. We started again. Every time he slapped on my face, I reacted with “no” until I felt it as a real slap. This was the onboarding phase of the game. Then, the rule of the game was to “do violent things to me”. He pulled my hair, stuck his fingers to my eyeballs, stripped my shirt and choked me. I could imagine he was trying his best to extract the violent actions from his database. The rule for me is to feel the pain and shame with my body and silently endure it all. At the same time, I had an external eye on what elements could be used in the performance. I brought my personal sensation, emotion and experience as a woman into the event, but there was an external rule that forced me to keep a professional eye on the whole picture. There was a tension between this external rule and my emotional state, which also happened to Julio. At times, the flow breaches the levee. When he stirred his fingers in my mouth, my tongue had nowhere to escape and had to slide in between the fingers. The fingers invaded deeper in my throat. Accidentally, I noticed the corner of his mouth turning upward, and my heart sank. That was the moment I felt unbearable pain, desperate and traumatized, though it was likely just because he saw some booger in my eyes. Fortunately, the game has its boundary. As I was evaluating if the elements were enough for the performance, I felt a gentle touch on my shoulder. Once, and twice… I stood still. After a while, a tentative voice came: “Can we end this exercise?” The exercise in a creative process is similar to a play/game. A structure and mechanism are designed to make bodily movements and interactions happen, which is equivalent to the rules of the play.

Compared to the free flow of the creative process, the presentation of the performance contains a relatively fixed movement sequence. However, though the presentation as a whole has its intention to deliver certain messages, every moment as time flowed, we were merely doing the thing. I reduced my consciousness to only receiving and reacting to what my body felt at the moment. I did not attempt to show anything to the audience within the actions. The way I performed was different from that discussed in Houseman’s concept of the show because my actions did not mean to deliver my emotions to the audience but rather put myself in a situation where the actions affected me . I let my body, a woman’s body, a Chinese body, act on its own. In this sense, my actions directly point at my dispositions instead of at the audience. Thus, it is more appropriate to study it in the modality of a ritual rather than the show.


The contradictory relationships: the refusal of inferential interpretation
To further analyse this event as a ritual, it is worth diving into how the ritual relationships are formed in the ‘relational configurations’ (Houseman, 2007: 1). As shown in the description, the face-to-face standing position and the glass board between the performers form a spatial configuration. When the man was extending his arm through the glass, he could do anything to the woman within the range of movement of the gloves. There was also a chronological structure attached to the spatial structure when the woman turned to be the active performer and she extended the hand to the other side. The chronological and spatial structure realized the relationships between the performers. In the first part, the man has power over the woman, imposing violence and pain on her. However, when the man withdrew his hands and the woman’s hands reached the other side, which signals a reversal of spatial structure, she did not have power over the man. One of the audience, according to his feedback afterwards, expected the woman to do the same thing the man did to her. Instead of revenge, what the woman did to the man was not easily comprehensible. A woman should not be stroking a harasser’s arm and sucking the hand that had imposed pain on her. On the man’s side, the alternating between slapping the face and brushing the hair was also contradictory. There seem to be paradoxical intentions and emotions condensed in one event. The phenomenon of ‘ritual condensation’ proposed by Michael Houseman and Carlo Severi would be helpful for the analysis. In a ritual condensation, contradictory relationships are enacted in a single sequence of actions  (Houseman, 2007). To analyze the contradictions of the ritual, it is necessary to examine how the paradoxical relationships are performed.

There are several layers of relationships in this event. In the language of theatre, Julio and I, as performers, were playing the roles of a man imposing violence and a woman receiving violence. Julio told me he imagined we were in an affective space and my state of performing also reminded him about that . It was an effective way to perform in a theatrical realm, but we cannot deny that it was my physical body that received the touch and pain, and it was Julio’s hands, though insulated by the gloves, that felt the sense of hitting and touching. As Julio also said, “But I am doing this to X (the author’s name)!”  This is not only about the physical body, but our social relationship. We are co-workers, friends and classmates and though we might forget about them when performing, these relationships could not disappear.

Not only did we ignore our social relationships, but also we put aside our personal dispositions in real life. One aspect is that I am a masochist , but I could not act out the masochist side of me because it would be wrong for the expression of the performance. The representational expression is the relationship between the individual and the regime, which is close to a girl with no weapons in hand against an absolute power. Although this relationship itself is a love-hate contradictory one and the performance is a metaphoric way to present its complexity, I had to channel myself to a “normal” girl and thus hide the masochist me. For example, when I was slapped, I felt the pain was real and I wanted to escape but could not. However, while I was channelling to the part of my bodily experience as a girl/woman, it was not possible to get rid of the masochist side completely, since they are inherently connected. This made the process difficult for me to digest and I felt unexplainable pain somewhere inside my chest every time it came into my mind, including when I was writing this essay.

The interpersonal relationship and the relationship of the real-life self and performing self filled the actions with contradictions. These contradictions are not only revealed in the movement sequences of torturing (being tortured) and caring, such as the pause in between the slapping and the reverse of the active side but also in each movement itself. It seemed that the man could do whatever he wanted to the woman, but actually, it was the woman’s reaction that decided what the man did. For instance, when Julio choked me, he had to be attentive to my breath . The contradictory relationship creates a special connection. One of the onlookers told us that the eye contact between the two performers carried a lot.

It is worth noticing that most of the audience in the room evaded talking about this part of the performance. As Houseman suggested, the empathic simulation is not of main importance of the ritual condensation, but rather the actions are directly relevant to them (Houseman, 2007: 12). People engaged in the performance, whether they helped to hold the glass board or not, were part of the ritual, which led to their silence about it. Though the representational relationship made sense within the political reality the performance discussed, the audience who did not know the context might interpret it in relation to other parts of the performance or their personal knowledge. However, in Houseman’s theory, the “inferential interpretation plays but a limited role” (Houseman, 2007: 9). The event includes harsh actions, but it refuses to give an explanation, not only to the audience but also to the performers. From my perspective, when the paradoxical relationships overlay, it becomes extremely difficult to explain even though I have been feeling many sorts of sensory information. This can be regarded as the ritualistic aspect of the performance.


Further discussion: when the interpretation comes to a stop
This essay does not intend to turn the performance into a ritual, but to use the modalities and tools for ritual analysis to unpack the performance from different layers of relationships. In the descriptions of the performance, I used both third-person and first-person perspectives in writing. It is not only a way of adjusting the distance between myself and the text, but also experimenting with the relationship between the writing and theory . As Houseman points out, the ritual is not reducible to the interpretations. Its resistance to being put into words indicates its self-referential nature (Houseman, 2007). While I believe in the necessity to interpret the ritual or performance, I agree that at a certain point, the interpretation should stop. For further studies, I would like to explore when the interpretation should stop and how the interpretation opens a new way for description.




Bibliography
Houseman, M. (2003) Vers un modèle anthropologique de la pratique psychothérapeutique, Thérapie Familiale, 24 (3) pp.289–312. DOI: 10.3917/tf.033.0289
Houseman, M. (2007) Menstrual slaps and first blood celebrations: Inference, simulation and the learning of ritual, In: Berliner, D. and Sarro, R. (eds.) Learning religion: Anthropological approaches. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. pp.31–48.
